Add migration guide from ink! 4.x to 5.0 (#301)
paritytech/ink-docs: versioned_docs/version-5.x/faq/migrating-from-ink-4-to-5.md

---
title: Migrating from ink! 4.x to 5.0
slug: /faq/migrating-from-ink-4-to-5
---

<img src="/img/title/migration-4.x-to-5.0.svg" className="titlePic" />

We've made a couple of breaking changes from ink! 4.x to ink! 5.0.
On this page we outline how you can migrate existing clients and
contracts from 4.x to 5.0.

This release addresses the majority of issues raised in [the OpenZeppelin
security review](https://blog.openzeppelin.com/security-review-ink-cargo-contract).
In particular, we addressed the proxy selector clashing attack.

You can find the full changelog of the 5.0 release [here](https://github.com/paritytech/ink/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md).

:::caution
This migration guide only considers your code base! Not your data!

If you have an existing contract on-chain you cannot just

> upgrade the code on-chain, you also have to migrate your data.

Reviewer: Same as earlier

The way how ink! 4.0 stores data and reads from it (i.e. the storage

> layout) changes from ink! 3.x to 4.0.

Reviewer: How is this related to migration from 4.x to 5.0?

Author: Thanks, improved it.

We created a convenience macro to derive the re-exported traits `ink::scale::Encode`,
`ink::scale::Decode` and `ink::scale_info::TypeInfo`.

```rust
// Previously
#[scale::Encode, scale::Decode)]
#[cfg_attr(feature = "std", derive(::scale_info::TypeInfo))]
pub enum Error {}

// Now
#[ink::scale_derive(Encode, Decode, TypeInfo)]
pub enum Error {}
```

The documentation of the macro can be found [here](https://docs.rs/ink/5.0.0-rc/ink/attr.scale_derive.html).

### Wildcard selectors: only one other message is allowed in the contract besides the wildcard selector

Following [our security review by OpenZeppelin](https://blog.openzeppelin.com/security-review-ink-cargo-contract),
we've tightened the usage of wildcard selectors.
With ink! 5.0 we allow only exactly one other contract message with a well-known reserved
selector to be defined. In ink! 4.x, more than one other message was allowed.

Read more in [the PR](https://github.com/paritytech/ink/pull/1708) and [IIP-2: Limit contracts with a wildcard selector to one other message](https://github.com/paritytech/ink/issues/1676).

The proposal is to restrict contracts with a wildcard selector to only have one other message

> with a reserved/well known selector. This guarantees that there are no selector clashes,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with a reserved/well-known selector. This guarantees that there are no selector clashes,
```

pub enum ProxyMessage {
    UpgradeContract(Hash),
}

/// One other message allowed to handle messages.
/// Fails to compile unless `@` is used as the selector.
#[ink(message, selector = @)]
pub fn handler(&self, msg: ProxyMessage) {
  match msg {
    ProxyMessage(hash) => { }
  }
}

/// An additional message. Fails to compile when uncommented.
// #[ink(message)]
// pub fn additional_message(&self, msg: ProxyMessage) {
//    match msg {
//        ProxyMessage(hash) => ...
//    }
// }
```

### Events 2.0

In prior ink! versions, events were defined inside the `#[ink::contract]` macro.
With ink! 5.0 we decouple events from the `#[ink::contract]` macro,
allowing events to be shared between contracts.
We've updated [the Events documentation page](/5.x/basics/events) accordingly.

The syntax of defining events within the main `#[ink::contract]` macro will continue to work,
no code changes in existing contracts are required to update to the new syntax.

:::caution
The topic calculation changed in general, so also for events that are declared inside the
`#[ink::contract]` macro!

This is a breaking change for any client code which uses topics to filter events.

> Please see [#1827](https://github.com/paritytech/ink/pull/1827) for details.

Reviewer: Need also to include https://github.com/paritytech/ink/pull/2031

:::

### No more unchecked arithmetic

> Unchecked arithmetic operations in a contract no longer work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unchecked arithmetic operations in a contract are no longer supported for arithmetic safety reasons.
```

Compiling a contract that contains those will fail gracefully.
You need to handle overflows using e.g. saturating or wraparound math.

> This was done in [#1831](https://github.com/paritytech/ink/pull/1831).

Reviewer 2: The guide could briefly explain the alternatives (`unchecked`, `saturating`) and how to use them

Reviewer: I would just provide a link to the rust docs.

### Fail when decoding from storage and not all bytes consumed

If a contract previously relied on successful decoding which does not consume all bytes,
then recompiling with a version of ink! which includes this change will cause that contract
to trap at runtime when attempting to decode.

A simple example would be if a storage cell contains some bytes which were in the first place
an encoded `u32`. If the contract attempts to decode those into a `u8`
this would previously have succeeded, now the contract would trap.

We introduced this change in [#1897](https://github.com/paritytech/ink/pull/1897).

> ### [ink_e2e] Improved `call()` API

Reviewer: Missing the notion of builder API in e2e: https://github.com/paritytech/ink/pull/1917

    .call().insert_balance(1_000));
```

See [#1782](https://github.com/paritytech/ink/pull/1782) for more details.

### New Data Structure: `StorageVec`

We've added a `Vec`-like data structure, built on top of Mapping.

This allows to retrieve elements from a vector and grow it without
having to load and push all elements.
For `Vec`, the cost of reading or writing a single element grows linearly corresponding
to the number of elements in the vector (its length). Additionally, the maximum capacity
of the whole vector is limited by the size of [ink!'s static buffer](https://github.com/paritytech/ink/blob/master/ARCHITECTURE.md#communication-with-the-pallet)
used during ABI encoding and decoding (default 16 KiB).
`StorageVec` on the other hand allows to access each element individually.

With a `Vec` it's possible to e.g. introduce a security issue in your contract
where an attacker can fill the `Vec`, making it very costly for other users to
access it or write to it.

You can find verbatim documentation on `StorageVec` [here](/5.x/datastructures/storagevec).
The page explains when to use `StorageVec` and when not.

> The Rust docs can be found [here](https://docs.rs/ink/5.0.0-rc/ink/storage/struct.StorageVec.html).

Reviewer 2: LGTM!

### Fallible methods for `Lazy`, `Mapping`, `StorageVec`

In [#1910](https://github.com/paritytech/ink/pull/1910) we added `try_*` methods for
reading and writing `Lazy` and `Mapping` values to and from storage.
The try methods correspond to `Mapping::{insert, get, take}`, `Lazy::{set, get}`.
For `StorageVec::{peek, get, set, pop, push}` we added `try_*` methods in
[#1995](https://github.com/paritytech/ink/pull/1995).

Please see the individual Rust docs for these new methods:

* [`StorageVec`](https://docs.rs/ink/5.0.0-rc/ink/storage/struct.StorageVec.html)
* [`Lazy`](https://docs.rs/ink/5.0.0-rc/ink/storage/struct.Lazy.html)
* [`Mapping`](https://docs.rs/ink/5.0.0-rc/ink/storage/struct.Mapping.html). For `Mapping`, the encoded size of the key is also accounted for.

You should use the `try_*` methods for dynamically sized values, unless you made sure
otherwise they will fit into the static buffer. The [static buffer in ink!](https://github.com/paritytech/ink/blob/master/ARCHITECTURE.md#communication-with-the-pallet)
is 16 kB by default.

We added a lint to `cargo-contract` 4.0 that will detect
potentially unsafe uses of methods for which there are safer alternatives:

> [`non_fallible_api`](https://use.ink/5.x/linter/rules/non_fallible_api).

Reviewer 2: LGTM!

of a concrete `[u8; 32]`.

```rust
// Previously
pub fn set_code(&mut self, code_hash: [u8; 32]) {
    ink::env::set_code_hash(&code_hash).unwrap_or_else(|err| {});
}
        
// Now 
pub fn set_code(&mut self, code_hash: Hash) {
    self.env().set_code_hash(&code_hash).unwrap_or_else(|err| {});
}
```

More details in [#1906](https://github.com/paritytech/ink/pull/1906).

### Buffer size can be customized

With [#1869](https://github.com/paritytech/ink/pull/1869) we added a possibility 
of setting a custom static buffer size for ink! to use.

ink! uses a static buffer for interacting with pallet-contracts, i.e. to move data
between `pallet-contracts` and a smart contract. The advantage of a static buffer
is that no gas-expensive heap allocations are necessary, all allocations are done
using simple pointer arithmetic.

The default static buffer size is 16 kB, which is enough for on-chain smart
contracts. However, the [Phala Network](https://phala.network/) parachain on Polkadot
allows the deployment of ink! contracts off-chain. Hence, for their chain certain high
computation contracts might require a larger buffer size.

> ### Custom signature topics

Reviewer: I think it may be moved as a subsection of Events 2.0
